The Office of the Premier in Mpumalanga has extended the deadline for young entrepreneurs to apply for the roll out of the 2023 Mpumalanga Youth Development Fund (MYDF). The fund is aimed at assisting deserving young people, aged 18-35 years, from Mpumalanga to kick-start and or expand their business ventures. The call for applications will close on 17 March 2023. Mpumalanga Premier Refilwe Mtshweni-Tsipane announced the new deadline during last week’s State of the Province Address (SOPA). “We intend to set aside at least 30% of funding for applications coming from the designated applicants, particularly people with disabilities from the rural areas,” she said. Since its inception, the project has empowered 97 youth-owned businesses across the province and funding to the tune of R140 million was allocated to them. “In the current financial year, 36 companies have been approved for funding, with a total amount of R92.3 million disbursed thus far. The ownership of these companies comprises 60 males, 45 females and five youth with disabilities. “These youth-owned enterprises are within sectors that are inclusive of mining, agriculture, manufacturing, transport and logistics,” Mtshweni-Tsipane said. The MYDF has entered the third year of its three-year piloting phase, which serves deserving and qualifying 100% youth-owned entities. Potential candidates should send their application forms, accompanied by a sound business plan and the following returnable documents:  Applications should be submitted in a form, which is accessible on www.mpumalanga.gov.za. Applicants should note the following:  Enquiries should be directed to Mr SB Ntandane on 013 766 2108/2006; Cell: 076 842 4296 or via email MYDF@mpg.gov.za. Applications to be directed to: Manager: Youth Development (for the attention of Mr SB Ntandane), Private Bag X11291, Mbombela 1200. Physical Address: Office of the Premier, Makhonjwa Building, 1st floor, Riverside Park, Government Boulevard, Mbombela. If no correspondence is received within four months after the closing date, applicants must accept that their applications have been unsuccessful. - SAnews.gov.za