The Mpumalanga provincial government has set aside R4.294 billion in the 2022/23 financial year to continue with strategic infrastructure development initiatives which will unlock investment and growth. Delivering the State of the Province Address (SOPA) on Friday, Mpumalanga Premier Refilwe Mtshweni-Tsipane said 102 projects have been completed, including both building and transport infrastructure. These projects include 88 educational facilities, three health facilities, two social development facilities and a library. “Four new schools in fast growing towns, that is Magogeni Primary School, Mpumelelo Primary School, New Klarinet Primary School and Mbatini Primary School, were completed,” the Premier said. The province anticipates to complete and replace old schools before June this year, including Msholozi where progress is at 96%; New Doornkop at 87%, Yinhle Lentfo at 82%, Mkhondo Boarding School at 85%, and Mpisi- Jamela at 79%. “With regards to Long-tom Secondary and Rockdale Extension 24, designs are being finalised and it is envisaged that construction will commence in 2023/24. “There are some projects that experienced delays due to community disruptions, poor contractor performance and construction materials shortages,” she said. The planning and design for the Linah Malatjie Tertiary Hospital in Emalahleni has progressed, with authorisation in terms of Environmental Impact Studies granted. The town planning processes has been completed as well as the preliminary and concept designs completed. Construction is set to commence during the 2023/24 financial year. The following provincial road projects have been completed: - Special maintenance on Road P170/1 from Graskop to Matibidi; - Upgrading of Road D3930 from Acornhoek to Hluvukani; - Upgrading of rural Road D281 from Volksrust to Daggakraal; - Rehabilitation of Road P95/1 between Verena Crossing to Gauteng Boundary; - Repair of a sink-hole on Road P9/1 Graskop; and - Emergency Repairs on Road D1043 (R65) between Graskop and Hazyview Repairs on the Tekwane South Bridge on the D2296, which made news headlines in February 2021 after it had collapsed due to heavy rain has been completed and is operational. “The Karino Interchange Project on the N4 which provides a link between Mbombela, Kanyamazane, N4 and access to the Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport has also been completed and is operational. “In an effort to improve the provincial road network, we have prioritised several strategic roads. One of the roads that has been prioritised is road P216/1 from Secunda to Embalenhle, which we will be constructing in the 2023/2024 financial year. “We will also build a bridge from Emalahleni City centre leading to Pine Ridge, Clarinet, Siyanqoba and Verena in order to improve safety and ease traffic flow in that area. Planning and design hereon will commence in the 2023/2024 financial year,” the Premier said. The province will continue with the upgrading, rehabilitation and major maintenance of the following roads that serve the major tourism nodes in the province: - SAnews.gov.za 