The Western Cape Department of Human Settlements has encouraged first-time homebuyers to take advantage of the over 500 affordable housing opportunities available across the province. According to the provincial department, the available homes specifically cater for households with a gross income of between R3 501 and R22 000 per month. Housing opportunities range from one, two and three-bedroom homes at Forest Village in Cape Town; Syferfontein in George and Mill Park in Bredasdorp. Western Cape residents are urged to apply for the department’s Help Me Buy a Home/FLISP subsidy to purchase one of the available housing opportunities. The Help Me Buy a Home/FLISP subsidy is designed to assist first-time homebuyers to acquire a home. “The subsidy will essentially assist to reduce monthly bond or loan payments, making it more affordable to purchase a home. Qualifying applicants will receive a subsidy based on their gross household income,” the department explained. According to Western Cape Infrastructure MEC, Tertuis Simmers, there are numerous housing opportunities in prime residential areas across the province. “If your household income is between R3 501 to R22 000 per month, and you meet the qualifying criteria, this subsidy can assist you to purchase your first home. We encourage young professionals, first-time homeowners and those starting a family to research the options available to get their foot into the property market.” Meanwhile, the department’s Communication and Stakeholder Relations Director, Nathan Adriaanse, believes that there are multiple benefits to home ownership. “While it often means different things to different people, to most a home represents stability, ownership of an asset with a value that will increase over time and providing a legacy within the family that many generations can benefit from. A home also helps to build communities since many homeowners get involved in the affairs of the neighbourhood for the betterment of the entire community,” he said. To date, over 250 Western Cape residents have purchased their first homes in one of the department’s three developments, using the Help Me Buy a Home/FLISP subsidy. At present, there are 571 housing units still available in the Eerste River Cape Town, George and Bredasdorp developments. Residents are encouraged to check the qualification criteria and to submit an application for one of the available housing opportunities. Interested residents can apply directly to the department’s partners. The department said it remains committed to accelerating human settlement delivery while promoting social inclusion through the development of integrated, resilient, safe and sustainable human settlements for residents of the Western Cape. Details of the units and contact details of the agents can be found on the department’s website at https://www.westerncape.gov.za/dept/human-settlements/documents/public_i.... In addition, residents can contact their nearest municipal housing office or the Department of Human Settlements at 27 Wale Street, Cape Town or 021 483 6488 / 0611 / 8984 / 0623 / 2060 or at human.settlements@westerncape.gov.za. For more information visit www.westerncape.gov.za/dept/human-settlements. – SAnews.gov.za 